<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
			<p>Jenny brought her arms out from under the blanket and put them behind her neck. It was icy cold in the room, and dark. No ray of light came through the shutters. She struck a match and looked at her watch‚ÅÝ‚Äîit was nearly seven. She could doze a little longer, and she crept down under the blankets again, with her head deep in the pillow.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúJenny, are you asleep?‚Äù Francesca opened the door without knocking, and came close to the bed. She felt for her friend‚Äôs face in the dark and stroked it. ‚ÄúTired?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo. I am going to get up now.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhen did you come home?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAbout three o‚Äôclock. I went to Prati for a bath before lunch and ate at the Ripetta, you know, and when I came home I went to bed at once. I am thoroughly rested. I‚Äôll get up now.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWait a moment. It‚Äôs very cold; let me light the fire.‚Äù Francesca lighted the lamp on the table.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy not call the signora? Oh, Cesca, come here, let me look at you.‚Äù Jenny sat up in bed.</p>
			<p>Francesca placed the lamp on the table by the bed and turned slowly round in the light of it. She had put on a white blouse with her green skirt and thrown a striped scarf about her shoulders. Round her neck she wore a double row of deep red corals, and long, polished drops hung from her ears. She pulled her hair laughingly from her ears to show that the drops were tied to them by means of darning wool.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFancy, I got them for sixty-eight lire‚ÅÝ‚Äîa bargain, wasn‚Äôt it? Do you think they suit me?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCapitally! With that costume, too. I should like to paint you as you are now.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, do. I can sit to you if you like‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI‚Äôm too restless nowadays to work. Oh dear!‚Äù She sighed and sat down on the bed. ‚ÄúI had better go and bring the coal.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She came back carrying an earthenware pot of burning charcoal, and stooped down over the little stove. ‚ÄúStay in bed, dear, till it gets a little warmer in here. I will make the tea and lay the table. I see you have brought your drawing home. Let me have a look at it.‚Äù She placed the board against a chair and held the lamp to it.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI say! I say!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt is not too bad‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhat do you think? I am going to make a few more sketches out there. I am planning a big picture, you see‚ÅÝ‚Äîdon‚Äôt you think it is a good subject, with all the working people and the mule-carts in the excavation field?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúVery good. I am sure you can make something of it. I should like to show it to Gunnar and Ahlin. Oh, you are up! Let me do your hair. What a mass of it you have, child. May I do it in the new fashion?‚ÅÝ‚Äîwith curls, you know.‚Äù Francesca pulled her fingers through her friend‚Äôs long, fair hair. ‚ÄúSit quite still. There was a letter for you this morning. I brought it up. Did you find it? It was from your little brother, was it not?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes,‚Äù said Jenny.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWas it nice?‚ÅÝ‚Äîwere you pleased?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, very nice. You know, Cesca, sometimes‚ÅÝ‚Äîonly on a Sunday morning once in a while‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI wish I could fly home and go for a stroll in Nordmarken with Kalfatrus. He is such a brick, that boy.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Francesca looked at Jenny‚Äôs smiling face in the glass. She took down her hair and began to brush it again.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, Cesca; there is no time for it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh yes. If they come too early they can go into my room. It is in a terrible state‚ÅÝ‚Äîa regular pigsty‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut never mind. They won‚Äôt come so early‚ÅÝ‚Äînot Gunnar, and I don‚Äôt mind him if he does, and not Ahlin either for that matter. He has already been to see me this morning; I was in bed, and he sat and talked. I sent him out on to the balcony while I dressed, and then we went out and had a good meal at Tre Re. We have been together the whole afternoon.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Jenny said nothing.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe saw Gram at Nazionale. Isn‚Äôt he awful? Have you ever seen anything like it?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt think he is bad at all. He is awkward, poor boy, exactly as I was at first. He is one of those people who would like to enjoy themselves, but don‚Äôt know how to.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI came from Florence this morning,‚Äù said Francesca, imitating him, and laughed. ‚ÄúUgh! If he had come by aeroplane at least.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou were exceedingly rude to him, my dear. It won‚Äôt do. I should have liked to ask him here tonight, but I dared not because of you. I could not take the risk of your being discourteous to him when he was our guest.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo fear of that. You know that quite well.‚Äù Francesca was hurt.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo you remember that time when Douglas came home with me to tea?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, after that model business, but that was quite a different matter.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNonsense. It was no concern of yours.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWasn‚Äôt it? When he had proposed to me and I had very nearly accepted him.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHow could he know?‚Äù said Jenny.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnyway, I had not quite said no, and the day before I had been with him to Versailles. He kissed me there several times and lay with his head in my lap, and when I told him I didn‚Äôt care for him he didn‚Äôt believe me.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt is not right, Cesca.‚Äù Jenny caught her eye in the mirror. ‚ÄúYou are the dearest little girl in the world when you use your brains, but sometimes it seems as if you had no idea you are dealing with living beings, with people who have feelings that you must respect. You <em>would</em> respect them if you were not so thoughtless, for I know you only want to be good and kind.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚Äú<i xml:lang="it">Per Bacco.</i> Don‚Äôt be too sure of that. But I must show you some roses. Ahlin bought me quite a load this afternoon at a Spanish stairs.‚Äù Cesca smiled defiantly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou ought to stop that kind of thing, I think‚ÅÝ‚Äîif only because you know he cannot afford it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt care. If he is in love with me, I suppose he likes it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI won‚Äôt talk of reputation after all these doings of yours.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, better not speak about my reputation. You are quite right there. At home, in Christiania, I have spoilt my reputation past mending, once and for all.‚Äù She laughed hysterically. ‚ÄúDamn it all! I don‚Äôt care.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt understand you, Cesca darling. You don‚Äôt care for any of those men. Why do you want.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ And as to Ahlin, can‚Äôt you see he is in earnest? Norman Douglas, too, was in earnest. You don‚Äôt know what you are doing. I really do believe, child, that you‚Äôve no instincts at all.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Francesca put away brush and comb and looked at Jenny‚Äôs hairdressing in the glass. She tried to retain her defiant little smile, but it faded away and her eyes filled with tears.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI had a letter this morning, too.‚Äù Her voice trembled. ‚ÄúFrom Berlin, from Borghild.‚Äù Jenny rose from the dressing-table. ‚ÄúYes, perhaps you had better get ready. Will you put the kettle on, or do you think we‚Äôd better cook the artichokes first?‚Äù She began to make the bed. ‚ÄúWe might call Marietta‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut don‚Äôt you think we had better do it ourselves?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBorghild writes that Hans Hermann was married last week. His wife is already expecting a child.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Jenny put the matchbox on the table. She glanced at Francesca‚Äôs miserable little face and then went quietly up to her.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt is that singer, Berit Eck, you know, he was engaged to.‚Äù Francesca spoke in a faint voice, leaning for an instant against her friend, and then began to arrange the sheets with trembling hands.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut you knew they were engaged‚ÅÝ‚Äîmore than a year ago.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes‚ÅÝ‚Äîlet me do that, Jenny; you lay the table. I know, of course, that you knew all about it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Jenny laid the table for four. Francesca put the counterpane on the bed and brought the roses. She stood fumbling with her blouse, then pulled out a letter from inside it and twisted it between her fingers.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe met them at the Thiergarten‚ÅÝ‚Äîshe writes. She says‚ÅÝ‚Äîoh, she can be brutal sometimes, Borghild.‚Äù Francesca went quickly across the room, pulled open the door of the stove, and threw the letter in. Then she sank down in an armchair and burst into tears.</p>
			<p>Jenny went to her and put one arm round her neck.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCesca, dearest little Cesca!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Francesca pressed her face against Jenny‚Äôs arm:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe looked so miserable, poor thing. She hung on his arm, and he seemed sullen and angry. I can quite imagine it. I am sorry for her‚ÅÝ‚Äîfancy allowing herself to become dependent on him in such a way. He has brought her to her knees, I am sure. How could she be such an idiot, when she knew him? Oh, but think of it, Jenny! He is going to have a child by somebody else‚ÅÝ‚Äîoh, my God! my God!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Jenny sat on the arm of the chair. Cesca nestled close to her:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI suppose you are right‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI have no instincts. Perhaps I never loved him really, but I should have liked to have a child by him. And yet I could not make up my mind. Sometimes he wanted me to marry him straight off, go to the registry office, but I wouldn‚Äôt. They would have been so angry with me at home, and people would have said we were obliged to marry, if we had done it that way. I did not want that either, although I knew they thought the worst of me all the same, but that did not worry me. I knew I was ruining my reputation for his sake, but I did not care, and I don‚Äôt care now, I tell you.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut he thought I refused because I was afraid he would not marry me afterwards. ‚ÄòLet‚Äôs go to the registry office first, then, you silly girl,‚Äô he said, but I would not go. He thought it was all sham. ‚ÄòYou cold!‚Äô he said; ‚Äòyou are not cold any longer than you choose to be.‚Äô Sometimes I almost thought I wasn‚Äôt. Perhaps it was only fright, for he was such a brute; he beat me sometimes‚ÅÝ‚Äînearly tore the clothes off me. I had to scratch and bite to protect myself‚ÅÝ‚Äîand cry and scream.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd yet you went back to him?‚Äù said Jenny.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI did, that is true. The porter‚Äôs wife did not want to do his rooms any longer, so I went and tidied up for him. I had a key. I scrubbed the floor and made his bed‚ÅÝ‚ÄîHeaven only knows who had been in it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Jenny shook her head.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBorghild was furious about it. She proved to me that he had a mistress. I knew it, but I did not want proof. Borghild said he had given me the key, because he wanted me to take them by surprise, and make me jealous, so that I should give in, as I was compromised anyway. But she was not right, for it was <em>me</em> he loved‚ÅÝ‚Äîin his way‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI know he loved me as much as he could love anybody.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBorghild was angry with me because I pawned the diamond ring I had from our grandmother. I have never told you about it. Hans said he <em>had</em> to have money‚ÅÝ‚Äîa hundred <i xml:lang="nn">kroner</i>‚ÅÝ‚Äîand I promised to get it. Where I didn‚Äôt know. I dared not write to father, for I‚Äôd spent more than my allowance already, so I went and pawned my watch and a chain bracelet and that ring‚ÅÝ‚Äîone of those old ones, you know, with a lot of little diamonds on a big shield. Borghild was angry because it had not been given to her, being the eldest, but grandmother had said I should have it, as I was named after her. I went down one morning as soon as they opened; it was hateful, but I got the money and I took it to Hans. He asked where I had got it from, and I told him. Then he kissed me and said: ‚ÄòGive me the ticket and the money, puss‚Äô‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat is what he used to call me‚ÅÝ‚Äîand I did. I thought he meant to redeem it, and said he need not. I was very much moved, you see. ‚ÄòI will settle it in another way,‚Äô said Hans, and went out. I stayed in his rooms and waited. I was very excited, for I knew he wanted the money, and I decided to go and pawn the things again the next day. It would not be so horrid a second time‚ÅÝ‚Äînothing more would be difficult. I would give him everything now. Then he came‚ÅÝ‚Äîand what do you think he had done?‚Äù She laughed amidst the tears. ‚ÄúHe had redeemed the things from the loan-office and pawned them with his private banker, as he called him, who gave more for them.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe went about all day together‚ÅÝ‚Äîchampagne and all the rest of it‚ÅÝ‚Äîand I went home with him at night. He played to me‚ÅÝ‚Äîmy God, how he played! I lay on the floor and cried. Nothing mattered as long as he played like that, and to me alone. You have not heard him play; if you had, you would understand me. But afterwards it was awful. We fought like mad, but I got away at last. Borghild was awake when I came home. My dress was torn to tatters. ‚ÄòYou look like a street-girl,‚Äô she said. I laughed. It was five o‚Äôclock.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI should have given in in the end, you know, if it hadn‚Äôt been for one thing he had said. Sometimes he used to say: ‚ÄòYou are the only decent girl I have met. There is not a man who could get round you. I respect you, puss.‚Äô Fancy, he respected me for refusing to do what he begged and worried me about constantly. I wanted to give in, for I would have done anything to please him, but I could not get over my scare; he was so brutal, and I knew there were others. If only he had not frightened me so many times, I might have given up the struggle but then, of course, I should have lost his respect. That is why I broke with him at last‚ÅÝ‚Äîfor wanting me to act in such a way that he would despise me.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She nestled close to Jenny, who caressed her.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo you love me a little, Jenny?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou know I do, darling child.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou are so kind. Kiss me once more! Gunnar is kind, too‚ÅÝ‚Äîand Ahlin. I shall be more careful. I don‚Äôt wish him any harm. Besides, I may marry him, as he is so fond of me. Ahlin would never be brutal‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI know that. Do you think he would worry me? Not much. And I might have children. Some day I will come into money, and he is so poor. We could live abroad and we could both work. There is something refined about all his work, don‚Äôt you think? That relief of the boys playing, for instance, and the cast for the Almquist monument. Not very original, perhaps, in composition, but so beautiful, so noble and restful, and the figures so perfectly plastic.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Jenny smiled a little and stroked the hair from Francesca‚Äôs forehead; it was wet with tears.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI wish I could work like that‚ÅÝ‚Äîalways‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut I have those eternal pains in my heart and my head. My eyes hurt me too, and I am dead tired always.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou know what your doctor says‚ÅÝ‚Äîonly nerves‚ÅÝ‚Äîevery bit of it. If you only would be sensible!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI know. That is what they all say, but I am afraid. You say that I have no instincts‚ÅÝ‚Äînot in the way you mean, but I have them all right in another way. I have been a devil all this week‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI know it perfectly well‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut I have been waiting all the time for something awful I knew was going to happen. You see, I was right.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Jenny kissed her again.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI was down at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title z3998:initialism">S.</abbr> Agostino tonight. You know that image of the Madonna that works miracles; I knelt before it and prayed to the Virgin. I think I should be happier if I turned Catholic. A woman like the Virgin Mary would understand. I ought really never to marry. I ought to go into a convent‚ÅÝ‚ÄîSiena, for instance. I might paint copies in the gallery and earn some money for the convent. When I copied that angel for Melozzo da Forli in Florence there was a nun painting every day. It wasn‚Äôt so bad.‚Äù She laughed. ‚ÄúI mean, it was awful. I hated it. But they all said my copies were so good‚ÅÝ‚Äîand so they were. I believe I should be happy in that way. Oh, Jenny, if I only felt well and were at peace in my mind, but I am so bewildered and frightened. If I were well, I could work, work‚ÅÝ‚Äîalways. And I‚Äôd be so good and nice‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou don‚Äôt know how good I could be. I know I am not always good. I give in to every mood when I feel as I do at present. I am going to stop it, if only you will love me, all of you, but you especially. Let us ask that Gram here. Next time I see him I‚Äôll be so nice and sweet to him, you see. We‚Äôll ask him here and take him out, and I will do anything to amuse him. Do you hear, Jenny? Are you pleased with me now?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, Cesca dear.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGunnar does not think I can be serious,‚Äù she said pensively.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh yes, he does; he only thinks you are very childish. You know what he thinks of your work. Don‚Äôt you remember what he said in Paris about your energy and your talent? Great and original, he said. He did not think lightly of you that time.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGunnar is a nice boy, but he was angry with me because of Douglas.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAny man would have been angry with you. I was, too.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Francesca sighed and sat quiet an instant. ‚ÄúHow did you get rid of Gram? I thought you would never be able to shake that fellow off. I thought that he would come home with you and sleep here on the sofa.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Jenny laughed. ‚ÄúOh no! He went with me to the Aventine and had breakfast; then he went home. I rather like him, you know.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚Äú<i xml:lang="it">Dio mio!</i> Jenny, you are abnormally good. Have you not got enough to mother already, with us? Or have you fallen in love with him?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Jenny laughed again. ‚ÄúI don‚Äôt think there is much chance for me. I suppose he will fall in love with you, like the rest, if you are not careful.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThey all do, it seems‚ÅÝ‚ÄîHeaven only knows why. But they soon get cured, and then they‚Äôre angry with me afterwards.‚Äù She sighed.</p>
			<p>They heard steps on the stairs.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat is Gunnar. I am going into my room a little. I must bathe my eyes.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She passed Heggen in the door with a short greeting as she hurried away. He shut the door and came into the room.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou are all right, I see‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut so you always are. You are an extraordinary girl, Jenny. I suppose you have been working all the morning‚ÅÝ‚Äîand she?‚Äù He pointed towards Cesca‚Äôs room.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIn a bad state, poor little thing.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI saw it in the papers when I looked in at the club. Have you finished the study? Show me. It is very good.‚Äù Heggen held the picture to the light and looked at it for some time. ‚ÄúThis part stands out beautifully. It is powerful work. Is she lying on her bed crying, do you think?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt know. She has been crying in here. She had a letter from her sister.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIf ever I meet that cad,‚Äù said Heggen, ‚ÄúI shall find some pretext to give him a sound thrashing.‚Äù</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
